When the taste for physical
gratifications among them has grown more
rapidly than their education or
experience, the time will come when men
lose all self-restraint.
Alexander Dtoqueville
Welcome back to analyzing finance with
Nick. I'm bringing back the conversation
about pearl drift. You guys seem to
really like the last time I talked about
this and I'm going to talk about more
examples beyond just the definitions of
pearl drift terms of like relationships
and family structure more do other
things such as hobbies political
ideology how they approach their free
time etc. And just for to keep everybody
caught up like a definition for pearl
drift that I'm going to use for this is
the process which declining economic
conditions among the middle classes
especially but it could apply to pretty
much any social class forces them to
adopt lowerass behaviors which are then
reframed as intentional lifestyle
choices. This is mainly done to preserve
their self-image and maintain social
cohesion so people don't get so mad that
they rebel against the fact that they
are slowly falling down the socio ladder
and losing economic agency. It also
covers up for the fact that people who
thought they were in the middle class or
people who thought they were in the
upper middle class really aren't. The
core cognitive dissonance here is just
like an inconsistency to the class
identity that you believe you are versus
where you really are. A lot of previous
markers of middle or upper middle class
achievement such as home ownership,
marriage, families, particularly larger
families, regular vacations, retirement
savings that can cover your retirement
to be able to quit working by 60. I've
become out of reach for many people. And
so rather than admit downward mobility,
they rationalize it by saying, "Hey,
look, I'm child-free by choice. Marriage
is an outdated institution and
traditional family structures are
oppressive. I want something more
alternative. I don't believe in owning
property. Working at a job is for
sellouts. Don't start a business because
you're going to fail 95% of the time
anyway." These are examples mostly
caused by things such as wage
stagnation, housing unaffordability,
declining social mobility, falling real
wages due to inflation and crowding out
of government spending versus other
aspects of the economy. The internet
creating a more winner take all economy
across every industry. The traditional
status pathways kind of dying out and
just the increased cost of child care.
People now have to create these new
narratives such as like material
constraint as a good thing or
refraraming basically their lack of
achievement versus like to make it an
actual choice and a really a better
lifestyle in reality. A lot of it they
feel like they belong in a certain
social class such as having a certain
level education or living in a certain
neighborhood, but they really can't
actually hit those goals without having
to move down a social class, which just
kind of hurts everybody's ego. With that
out of the way, let's move to some
examples really of pearl drift. Like the
most common example, and before I get to
it, I have realized that I've inherited
some pearl drift without even knowing
it. I think all of us have to a certain
degree. I don't really mean this to
offend anybody in particular, but at the
same time, you guys like when I'm
honest, and so I might say some things
that probably hurt your identity a
little bit or might be considered
offensive. But without further ado,
let's get started. There's a lot of
prolift when it comes to aesthetics. The
first one is just the normalization of
dirty cities, whether it's graffiti,
whether it's littering, whether it's the
toleration of homelessness.
This is all kind of a pearl drift in the
sense like if you go watch these old
videos, there's this really good YouTube
channel I'll put in the description. It
shows colored clips of all the big
cities in the world from 1900 to 1950.
And one thing you'll realize is how
clean it is and how everybody is
well-dressed. And it's not really that
way today anymore. Why is it not that
way? I think a lot of it is due to
prolift like wearing more casual fashion
and yeah, somebody who's wearing like a
bright teal colored shirt and not a suit
right now. I'm guilty of this as just as
anybody has become more popular because
it's not only financially more
affordable. The percentage of money
spent on clothes is about 10% less of
your budget now than it was in the
1950s. People spent over 10% of their
income on clothing and apparel. whereas
today it's like 3% or less. So people
were wearing cheaper made clothes so
they can have more variety and be more
comfortable. But it comes at the expense
of not looking as refined and wearing
stuff that's going to fall apart and not
look as nice as long. It's kind of a
pearl drift in our fashion in a sense.
fast fashion such as Zara and Forever 21
when it was around and other things like
that is kind of the most extreme
examples of Pearl Drift in fashion.
Going away from things that were made to
last forever and very elegant to more
casual stuff that you throw away after a
few wears is an example of pearl drift
in fashion and athleisure becoming the
default attire versus wearing a suit and
a tie every man or a nice dress every
day if you're a woman. Another example
of aesthetic pearl drift is tattoos and
piercings outside the ear becoming
mainstream. These were once really
considered really taboo and were only
found among like sailors and people in
organized crime and kind of more
workingass backgrounds. it they became
started mainstream really starting with
the 90s and it has continued to
accelerate particularly among
millennials which were the peak
generation for tattoos. They were also
coincidentally the peak generation for
economic procarity and downward social
class mobility. You now see it with
professions that you would previously
not expect to have tattoos such as
doctors, lawyers, business owners, tech
employees. It's often rationalized as
self-expression when it's really just a
negative class signal. It's kind of an
elephant in the room that nobody wants
to acknowledge. Van life culture and
embracing that is another example. like
romanticizing or living in tiny homes.
Like it's romanticizing living like what
people would condemn as like trailer
park life or like being basically
homeless and sleeping in your car is now
rebranded as an adventure and minimalism
when it was previously like you're
struggling and not doing well in life.
And it's an example of economically
forced decisions being rebranded as
chosen alternative lifestyle choices.
The other example is the devaluation of
professional titles. Like some people
instead of saying they're unemployed,
they're an entrepreneur. Everybody
instead of saying that you occasionally
give advice to people, you're now a
coach or a strategist. You have no
credentials. you have no like
affiliation with a company like you have
a consultant instead of saying that you
are semi-retired or between jobs. It's
like you have these titles that usually
usually meant something like a coach
literally means you were like a coach of
a team at a school or a professional
sports team or for an organization and a
consultant you thought you would be
working at a place like McKenzie or Bane
traveling around and giving businesses
advice or a strategist like you were
working at a hedge fund or a think tank
discussing strategy. Now anybody with
LinkedIn can brand themselves as these
things and people make fun of it all the
time but it's the example of pearl drift
of job titles in general. Now they're
really thing is like food like instead
of every family sitting together for
dinner for an hour undistracted
conversation time. We've now live in a
world where basically people eat
separately. There's often a lot of
places don't even have kitchens anymore.
They don't even have formal dining rooms
anymore because of smaller living spaces
or because of different schedules due to
parents working two different jobs
instead of having one at home and one
working or single parent dynamics. So
people have to work longer hours to
cover a family without the help of a
second parent. It's just not financially
viable to have everybody together and
have a home-cooked meal. Instead, you
normalize things that were cons
considered lowclass alternatives such as
eating fast food and having frozen food
and meal kits. They've now become fast
casual. It's like Chipotle now be
considering of a middle class
aspirational brand when it really is
similar to fast food in the past with
slightly better food quality. and you
have meal kits which are maybe a little
better quality than frozen food but
still not the same as having a fresh
home-cooked meal in a way and also a lot
of people are living alone cooking
doesn't really make as much sense like a
full meal if you're living alone and I
think that's the other thing too is you
have an increased hostility to
traditional aspirations
where like you see people who get judged
negatively in a lot of communities
for dressing formal, discussing
financial literacy or talking about
things like saving money. Etiquette like
traditional etiquette you'd get in a
catillian class is not really valued as
much. People look at you as an elitist
if you try to push that kind of thing.
Classical education, traditional nuclear
family structures, this stretches across
the ideology. A lot of this stuff is
looked down upon as being pretentious.
Also, the elimination of the idea of
certain basic proprieties. Even when I
was a child, and I'm not that old,
swearing was generally looked down upon.
Like, my parents would never say curse
words in front of me. At school, it was
heavily condoned. And if I did say
anything like that, I would get soap in
my mouth. up until my early teens. It's
become more mainstream for people using
curse words and relatively foul
language, especially more common with
women. Previously, foul language in
general was considered a low class
behavior and it's now kind of drifted up
the social class ladder. The next real
thing would be is like hobbies. Like
hobbies used to be involving like a
committed time to like building
something. Like a middle class hobby
would be something like gardening or
home improvement or learning a musical
instrument or doing civic involvement or
learning a new sport. Now hobbies have
been replaced with consumption hobbies
which were more common among the working
classes such as drinking, watching TV or
streaming and watching online media.
There's sitting around listening to
music like highskilled hobbies. People
don't have time anymore because of
economic procarity at longer hours maybe
because of that. Now you have people
justifying switching from or just
they're lacking the energy because of
like mental exhaustion. So a lot of like
these higher skilled hobbies that were
more common among the middle class are
being considered cons being rebranded as
boring. Golf is another good example of
this. Golf is becoming increasingly less
affordable for certain groups in
society. And so instead of saying, "Oh,
I can't afford golf." It's like, "Oh, I
just think it's boring." I mean there's
some people legitimately think golf is
boring even if they have money. So
there's always exceptions to these
rules. There's people have legitimate
ideological changes for these but I'm
just using common examples like
highskilled high time commitment hobbies
are replaced by consumption hobbies. All
you have to do is sit there and consume
whether visually or through eating like
going to a restaurant example.
and passive activities replace more
active activities.
Things like anti-natalism,
anti-ambition, anti-ownership rhetoric
has become more common, admitting you
can't really afford these things. You
just bash anybody who still wants them
because you can't really have them. It's
kind of like working-class grievances
disguised as alternative lifestyles. You
have in general more crude speech and
more emotional outbursts in public which
previously were not socially acceptable
if you're over the age of 10 years old
now have become more common and more
tolerated. You see also in general with
like all right so yeah that's kind of
one example. Other thing is like
parenting you're starting to see a
switch towards you see active among
upper class is still very active
parenting but with the pearl drift is
outsourcing parenting to TV which was
kind of a stereotype of lower class. If
you don't have the time to spend with
your kids you have to work or can't
afford a babysitter you just turn on the
TV and have them sit and watch that all
day. and it was really frowned upon in
the 70s and 80s. Now we've replaced that
with the iPad kid, which is essentially
the same thing, but nobody really wants
to admit that. You also have a decline
in things out of the name of safety or
busyness, but it might just be more
financial restraints like decline in
family reunions, right of passage
ceremonies such as like first
communions, confirmations, bar mitzvah,
etc. less birthday parties, less
graduation parties, like just
formalizing milestones and celebrating
them because it's it's get it's more
cost prohibitive to do so. And that's an
ex that and they those things generally
aren't as celebrated. Achievements
generally aren't as celebrated as much
in working classes. And that's kind of
starting to move up. The other thing too
is intentional underfurnishing. Like if
instead of not being able to afford to
buy furniture, you live a more
minimalist lifestyle with no furniture,
lack of art or decor. If paintings on
your wall is considered unnecessary, but
some people live years with blank walls
just to save money. I already talked
about the relationship ones before, but
this also stretches to political
ideologies. You have just a more crude
form of politics. For example, in 2004,
Howard Dean's Democratic primary
basically got destroyed by him making a
little too enthusiastic
of a scream after one of his speeches
during the primary season. And he
basically lost a primary because of
sounding a little clownish. Now, that
would not even be considered at all. And
the kind of stuff we tolerate from our
politicians on either side of the aisle
that would previously be scandalous is
now more normal because people don't
hold people to the old moral standards
anymore. They've adopted more of the
working class mentality that like you've
got to do what it takes to win. There's
really no room for propriety. And that's
kind of another example of pearl drift.
So
yeah, that's and then you have so that's
my take on this. I'm also going to do a
commentary about the geography of pearl
drift in the next video. But let me know
what you think. Do you guys keep going
with this? What are some examples of
pearl drift that I am missing that are
fairly common or that are just right in
front of your face that really people
don't notice? Let me know what you think
and thank you for watching.